# coronavirus-dmdc
Discovering Dynamic Patterns from Coronavirus Data using Dynamic Mode Decomposition with Control

Applying quantitative methods to understanding disease dynamics and planning intervention provides an important push towards eradication of human infectious diseases. Dynamic mode decomposition (DMD) has been utilized to discover coherent spatial-temporal modes in high-dimensional data collected from complex systems with time dynamics. Recently, DMD was applied to three different infectious disease sets, including Google Flu Trends Data, pre-vaccination measles in the UK, and the paralytic poliomyelitis wild type-1 cases in Nigeria [2]. Comparing the eigenvalue spectrum and dominant modes across infectious disease data sets allowed for detection of large-scale dynamic patterns within the data. In addition, a new method which extends DMD, dynamic mode decomposition with control (DMDc), provides the ability to disambiguate between the underlying dynamics and effects of actuation, resulting in accurate input-output models [1]. DMDc was applied to the analysis of infectious disease data with mass vaccination (actuation). I plan to analyze the dynamic patterns from COVID-19 (coronavirus) data using DMD and predict an optimized method of mass vaccination using DMDc.

DMD and DMDc will be used for analyzing the dynamic patterns of coronavirus. From the raw data, each location’s time series will be normalized to account for larger population centers. From the DMD output, the eigenvalue spectrum, mode selection vs. frequency, and the phase of the dynamic mode associated with frequency on the world map will be plotted. These plots will be compared with previous DMD studies on infectious diseases [2]. In addition, DMDc will be used to analyze the effects of actuation in the form of spatial delivery of vaccinations for coronavirus. A sparse dynamical system in a two-dimensional Fourier domain will be constructed. The number of modes allowed to be zero will be small. To construct the dynamical system on the spatial modes, a temporal oscillation frequency will be chosen randomly for each mode and a small, stable damping rate will be chosen similarly. The boundary conditions will be periodic. The spatial actuation will then be Fourier transformed in order to compute the effect on the underlying dynamical system. The dynamical system with and without actuation will be plotted to compare actuation effects. Optimization will then be applied to determine the spatial actuation which will result in the fastest decaying eigenvalues and the smallest dynamic modes. The optimization algorithm will be chosen in accordance to the model produced and will be iteration-based in the worst case. From previous usages of DMD and DMDc on infectious disease data, DMDc was determined to discover the underlying eigenvalues more accurately than DMD [1]. DMDc can be used independently of DMD and provide accurate input-output models for complex systems with and without activation. Therefore, this project only requires the DMDc algorithm.

From this analysis, I plan to use the DMDc results as a predictive model for potential centers of coronavirus cases and to ultimately design an optimized actuator (spatial delivery of vaccines) for this system. Previous research relating to applying DMD and DMDc to epidemiology and current research on modelling coronavirus will be used to analyze model validity and extract meaning from eigenvalues and dynamic modes. Since coronavirus currently has no vaccine, the only data available corresponds to a system with unforced dynamics. Verification of the actuation model will, therefore, be performed by comparing it to current control model predictions [5]. DMDc will be used to aid in the analysis of the spread of the coronavirus and optimal control measures that can be taken to eradicate or severely limit its spread.

Works Cited

[1] JoshuaL.Proctor,StevenL.Brunton,andJ.NathanKutz. Dynamicmodedecompositionwith control. SIAM Journal on Applied Dynamical Systems, 15(1):142–161, 2016. 
[2] JoshuaL.ProctorandPhilipA.Eckhoff. Discoveringdynamicpatternsfrominfectiousdisease data using dynamic mode decomposition. International Health, 7(2):139–145, 2015. 
[3] https://github.com/CSSEGISandData/COVID-19/tree/master/csse_covid_19_data 
[4] https://systems.jhu.edu/research/public-health/ncov-model-2/ 
[5] https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-019-38665-w

